<!---
title:The Rat Saga, Pt.1
date:Tue, 02 Oct 2021 14:00:00 EDT
description:It was some time around July of 2021, when I went to bed and started hearing tapping sounds from the ceiling. I immediately knew what was happening
--->

## The Rat Saga, Pt.1

### 2021-11-02

### Time Frame: July 2021 - October 2021

It was some time around July of 2021, when I went to bed and started hearing tapping sounds from the ceiling. I immediately knew what was happening: there's some kind of rodent (which from now on, I'll refer to as a rat) in between the floor of the first floor and the ceiling of the basement.

It's not _that_ big of a deal when you hear the occasional scutter, but when you're tired and trying to get a good night's rest, it's a major pain. I'd constantly hear metal clanging and scurrying around throughout the night to a point that I started playing music to drown out the sound a little.

Before you give me advice, there are a few things that I've tried:

> -Placing traps

> -High-pitched sounds (This was especially ineffective because I can still hear them too)

> -Peppermint oil

> -Any attempt to catch it using peanut butter, cheese, and other lures

It's really hard to really do anything about the rat considering my basement's ceiling area is as large as the house's footprint. The other problem is morals. As my mom doesn't want to kill the rat, mutilating it is unfortunately not an option.

The rat seems to only be using the house as a shelter (foreshadowing). This is kind of nice as I don't have to worry about the food stored in the basement or anything like that. However, there was one thing that was odd that happened. My ethernet cable (which comes from the ceiling of the basement) randomly stopped working one day. I have no reason not the believe that the rat did it, especially considering I know they're capable of destroying wires (happened to this logitech speaker set that was in the basement a few years ago).

To this day, I have not seen the rat with my eyes, and the proof that I have is the rat's poop.

## Rat: 1

## Neel: 0

_Stay tuned for the Rat Saga, Pt.2, it's going to be a good one_
